# ANTIOXIDANTS Why Do We Need HERBS & SPICES

Human body is made up of over 10 trillion cells. Cells are the fundamental building blocks of all organisms. A cell consists of a cell membrane, nucleus and the rest of the stuff inside called cytoplasm. The cell membrane which is made of cholesterol, separates the cytoplasm and nucleus from its external environment. The external environment contains the nutrients that the circulating blood provides every second. Our heart beats once each second  bringing fresh nutrients to every cell. After nutrients penetrate the cell membrane, they are metabolized and turned into energy that fuels the cell’s life functions. The by-products of this metabolic activity are waste that needs to be removed from the cell through the same cell membrane. Some of this waste is collected by the lymphatic fluids in our body which flow through a complex web of vessels kind of like blood vessels. I had discussed this in my post on the importance physical activity. 

Some of the waste released by the cells is in the form of unstable atoms and molecules which are formed when they gain or loose electrons. These are called Free Radicals. These are very unstable; typically highly reactive and short-lived. They are capable of damaging  the surrounding cells if not removed quickly. The Lymphatic system is not suitable for removal of this kind of waste. To handle this problem body utilizes a mechanism that neutralizes these free radicals right then and there. Certain nutrients in our food have this capability and these are called Antioxidants. 
When the cell’s environment, which is the blood supplied by the heart every second, is rich in antioxidants the free radicals released by the cell are immediately neutralized before they can cause any damage to the adjoining cells. 
One criteria by which one measures this antioxidant capacity of the food is called Oxygen Radical Absorbance Capacity or ORAC Value. 
Their are certain foods which are extremely high in ORAC value. These are known as super foods. They do not have much food value in terms of calories but when combined with typical food they add lot of nutritious value to the meal. Herbs and spices fall into this category and that is why I recommend them strongly.  Besides adding antioxidant value to the meal, they are also rich in trace minerals. By adding herbs and spices to a meal one improves the nutrition value of the meal. Many Indian spices have some of the highest ORAC values. Some examples: Clove (314,446), Cinnamon (267,537), Turmeric (102,700), Cumin (76,800), Tulsi (67,553), Ginger (28,811)

A typical person who consume an average of about 2,000 calories a day needs at least 8,800 ORAC value per day. Of course this number would depend upon what kind of food you eat. Non vegetarian food has a higher free radicals activity than vegetarian food. But many will be surprised to find that food they thought was healthy and sufficient doesn’t offer enough ORAC value. The following videos by Dr. Greger discusses this in detail and also provide the various research findings on the subject.