# CIRCADIAN  RHYTHM

The third pillar of health is keeping our circadian rhythm in sync with the day and night cycle of nature. The timing of our daily activities like eating, exercising, outdoor activities and sleeping play a key role in our wellbeing. All mammals including humans on earth evolved on a 24 hour day/night cycle. It has led to creation of an internal clock in each cell that dictates the essential functions and processes of that cell during daily 24 hour cycle. These are called Circadian rhythm and they play a key role in various aspects of physical and mental health. The word circadian comes from the Latin phrase “circa diem,”which means “around a day.” Circadian rhythms exist in most living organisms including plants helping them breath in CO2 at day time and oxygen at night. In humans circadian rhythms coordinate mental and physical systems throughout the body. The digestive system produces proteins to match the typical timing of meals, and the endocrine system regulates hormones to suit normal energy expenditure. Circadian rhythms ensure that the body’s processes are optimized at various points during a 24-hour period. 
Two important hormones body releases are Cortisol and Melatonin. Cortisol is released in the morning and it’s level rises with sunrise and stays high till sunset. It is called the getup and go hormone as it promotes activity. Melatonin rises after sunset and stays high throughout the night. It is a hormone that slows us down and prepares for the sleep cycle. These two hormones counteract and determine our circadian rhythm. 
I must point out that the term biological clock though used interchangeably, is not the same as circadian rhythm. Biological clocks help regulate the timing of bodily processes, including circadian rhythms. A circadian rhythm is an effect of a biological clock, but not all biological clocks are circadian. Some operate on lunar or seasonal cycles. 

HOW DOES CIRCADIAN RHYTHM WORK?
The circadian rhythms throughout the body are connected to a master clock, sometimes referred to as the circadian pacemaker, located in the brain. Specifically, it is found in a part of the brain called Suprachiasmatic Nucleus (SCN) in the hypothalamus. At different times of the day, clock genes in the SCN send signals to regulate activity throughout the body. Various systems of the body synchronize to this master clock. The master clock synchronizes itself to the naturye’s clock via multiple mechanisms that we have only recently begun to understand. 

The SCN is highly sensitive to light, which serves as an critical external cue that influences the signals sent by the SCN to coordinate internal clocks in the body. For this reason, circadian rhythms are closely connected to day and night. While other cues, like food intake, exercise, social activity, and temperature, can affect the master clock, light is the most powerful influence on circadian rhythms.

There is a protein called Melanopsin, discovered less than 20 years ago, which has a light sensing mechanism and it is present only in about 5,000 neurons of each eye. These neurons are hard wired to the master clock in the brain. Through these cells we perceive daylight and adjust our master clock in the brain.

2017 Nobel laureates Jeffrey C. Hall, Michael Rosbash and Michael W. Young discovered how plants, animals and humans adapt their biological rhythm so that it is synchronized with the Earth’s revolutions. They isolated a gene called Period that controls the normal daily biological rhythm. They showed that this gene encodes a protein called PER, that accumulates in the cell during the night, and is then degraded during the day.
There also is a gene called Timeless which makes a protein called TIM which combines with PER to enter the nucleus of the cell and helps maintain the cycle.
Our inner clock adapts our physiology not only to the dramatically different phases of day and night but also the various phases within day and night. Many of our genes are regulated by the biological clock and a carefully calibrated circadian rhythm adapts our physiology to the different phases of the day. The clock regulates various functions like hormone levels, sleep, body temperature, metabolism and even behavior. 
Our health is affected when there is a temporary mismatch between the external clock and this internal biological clock as in the case of jet lag. When this misalignment becomes chronic, it can lead to chronic diseases. In recent years circadian biology has developed into a separate research field, with implications for our health and wellness. 

Besides daylight other external factors that affect master clock include:

1. SLEEP PATTERN: One of the most important and well-known circaydian rhythms is the sleep-wake cycle. When properly aligned, a circadian rhythm can promote consistent and restorative sleep. But when this circadian rhythm is out of sync, it can create significant sleeping problems, including insomnia. 
2. BLUE LIGHT EXPOSURE: The screens used for TV, computer monitors and cell phones emit blue light and creates confusion in the circadian rhythm. Body thinks it may still be daytime. It is therefore important to attach a blue light filter to these devices or switch them off at least an hour before bed time. Most cell phones have this filter built in and should be switched to turn on automatically at night. 
3. EATING TIME: After society’s adaption to artificial light in last 150 years we have changed our eating habits and delayed dinner times and added late night snacking. This is another factor that confuses our body which thinks, it must still be day time. 
4. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY: Our body is programmed to engage in physical activity during daytime so when we go to gym and workout after dark, the body gets conflicting signals. 
5. TEMPERATURE: Our body is programmed to expect cooler temperatures at night so artificial heating at night can also upset the circadian rhythm. It is therefore recommended to set lower temperatures at night. 

As you can see many behaviors that we have modified in the last century and a half, have upset our circadian rhythm and these have played a role in the growth of chronic diseases. It is only in the last decade that we have paid attention to this field and work of Dr. Satchin Panda of Salk Institute (affiliated with UC SanDiego) and others have thrown new light on various causes of chronic diseases. When we change our lifestyle to bring it in harmony with circadian rhythm, results are remarkable, irrespective of the food we consume. Changes in diet when combined with circadian rhythm harmony, lead to wonders. Please watch the linked video by Dr. Satchin Panda. 👇

https://youtu.be/erBJuxVR7IE