# Common Sense

Even though I had posted a post titled “2 Most FAQs” many of you asked me precisely those questions. It is important to clarify that I am not a naturopath or some kind of alternate medicine healer. I am a diet and lifestyle coach. I do not believe in healing illnesses by prescribing a particular diet or herbal concoction. I do not believe in the concept of recommending different diets for different illnesses. Such practices are common among alternate medicine doctors. Consuming any particular concoction (Nani ka Nuskha) out of proportion may solve one problem but creates another. All humans, though genetically very similar,  are epigenetically very different. Food affects each person differently because the composition of our gut microbiome, which has over 38 trillion foreign cells, is very different. So if one nuskha (concoction of natural herbs or fruits or vegetables, nuts, seeds, grains or legumes) works for some people, it doesn’t mean it will work for all. That is why you find that in alternate medicine there is a lot of “hit or miss”. Some people get benefitted but some don’t. Those who get benefitted feel jubilant and tell 100 others (I was suffering from this, this, this and tried many doctors and no body could help me but this concoction from this naturopath helped me within 7 days). The word spreads and others also try. But the ones who don’t heal never go to 100 people and shares their failures. This is called a bias against negative outcome. As a result you find many alternate therapy like naturopaths, homeopaths, Ayurveda, yunani etc. flourish. Besides placebo effect is also at play and contributes to recovery. None of them have 100% or even 90% or 80% percent success rate. 
The amazing thing about PBWF/IF/10K is that every one who follows, sees tremendous benefits. The only problem is that too many people continue to make too many exceptions and then they complain that it did not work for them. What I recommend is nothing spectacular or out of the ordinary. It is mostly common sense supported by evidence.

A question was asked as to how to the increase HDL. Here is my response.👇

I do not believe in targeting different markers. I had explained in the very beginning that science is incomplete. There is lot more that we do not know as compared to what we do know. If you focus on improving HDL and that leads to deterioration of NYK-DL how would you know. After 20 years, when NYK-DL gets discovered, you will realize that you made a blunder in your life. 
It is best to play safe and consume PBWFood in narrow daytime eating window.

P.S.
By KNY-DL I mean Not-Yet m-Known DLs which may get discovered in future as science progresses.