# In Defense of Doctors

Most people live their young adult life disease free. (I am not talking about infectious diseases here). When you go to see a doctor for the first time in your adult age (45-50) and he checks you for BP, BS, Cholesterol and other markers and finds that some marker is outside the normal range, he has no idea about the trajectory of that marker. For example if your blood sugar test shows that your A1C is 7.8, he doesn’t know how rapidly it has been increasing. Is it increasing at the rate of .1 per month or .01. In that situation it is prudent for him to assume the worst case scenario. So he prescribes you  the medication. His objective is two fold:
1. To change the the trajectory and stop the disease from worsening.
2. To bring the marker down to a range, that is recommended by the professional association that governs his specialty. So if the doctor is a General Practitioner and a member of American College of Physicians (ACP) his guideline is to keep it under 8.0. His goal was only to stop the worsening of diabetes so a small dose of medication would achieve his goal. 
3. If the doctor is a member of American Diabetes Association, he wants to bring down your A1C under 7.0. He would want to give a bigger dose. 
4. If he is an Endocrinologist and a member of American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists (AACE) he would want to bring your A1C down to below 6.5. He probably will prescribe you two medications.

Most people after returning from the doctor’s office and getting the prescription filled, start taking medications regularly and make only minor changes to their diet and lifestyle. Most common are replacing sugar with an artificial sweetener and sugary soft drinks to diet drinks. (Which actually worsen the situation as we will see in later posts on that subject.) 
Now if a particular patient like yourself, is more conscientious and makes major changes in diet and lifestyle, his numbers would improves substantially by the next visit to the doctor. Based on that when you ask the doctor to stop the medication, he is vehemently opposed to it. He has been taught in his medical training that chronic diseases do not get cured. He firmly believes that the reason your markers are low is only because of medication. 
In my experience with over 4,000 members I come across this situation all the time and sooner or later each one of you will also face this dilemma. It is for this reason I am bringing it up now before we start discussing the chronic diseases in detail beginning next week. Each one you will have to navigate your path on your own and confront your doctor.