# NO ANIMAL FOOD?

I have noticed that after reading my diet & lifestyle guidelines, some people leave the group because they find it unacceptable to eliminate animal food and dairy from their diet. I have recently learned that some conservative Christians believe that God made animals as food for humans and not eating meat would be defying God. Also I have found that some Hindus believe that not having milk, yogurt and ghee would some how be insulting to mother cow and not following Lord Krishna’s footsteps. 
All I want to say to these people is to do the best you can. As mentioned in my guidelines, a sense of gratitude is very important and I have no desire to come between you and your God. 
Of the 12 guidelines only one restricts animal food. Even if you follow the other 11. you will see significant improvements in your health. Try to reduce animal food from your diet as much as you can without offending your God. 
Within animal food all highly processed foods like ham, bacon, sausage, pepperoni, salami, bologna, hotdogs etc. are recognized by the World Health Organization as Group 1 carcinogens (same category as smoking) so those should definitely be avoided. The least harmful among animal foods is fresh water fish like salmon, trout, tilapia, eel etc. or sardines. Replacing beef, goat, lamb and chicken with fish and shell fish is also a big improvement. One must keep in mind that  meat and fish are very rich in protein so the serving size needs to be restricted to under 3 ozs (85 grams) maximum each day. Learn to prepare your meat and fish with lots of vegetables added, as Chinese do.
Another suggestion is that on days you are consuming animal food try to minimize protein intake in other foods. The research by Dr. Gopalan and Madhavan of National Institute of Nutrition and by Dr. Colin Campbell suggests that safest way to consume animal protein is if the the total protein in diet for the day is kept under 8% of the total calories. Please watch the video linked below. 👇