# Water with Meals or Not ?

Should one drink water with meals? This question is often asked. If you search the literature, you find conflicting opinions. Some recommend that warm or room temperature water  should be consumed with the meal as it helps in digestive process. It is quite customary to drink lukewarm green tea in Chinese and Japanese cultures. Others suggest that one should not drink water during meal and consume it only after 45 minutes to an hour. One argument presented by this second group is that the digestive acids in the stomach get diluted affecting digestion. There is little scientific evidence to support this argument. Mayo Clinic clearly states that this is not the case. 

One thing totally missing in this debate is the kind of food one is consuming. If you are consuming solid foods only with very low moisture content, it is clearly advisable to drink some water or green or herbal tea with it. The water helps breakdown and digest the food better. In fact there are many baked foods which are impossible to swallow without help from some fluid. For example try eating a muffin or cookies or sweet potatoes with out water or tea, you will Choke on them. Most animal foods are also low in moisture (baked dishes as opposed to Indian curried dishes). That is why they apply brine on chicken and meat. In fact brine injections on chickens is a common practice at many plants. 

Considering that the diet I recommend is plant based whole food with large amounts of fruits and vegetables and even cooked items are cooked with water and gravy is retained in the meal, there is no need to consume much water. 
I do recommend one sip before starting the meal and couple of sips (well swished around in your mouth) at the end of the meal. 
The sip in the beginning helps sphincter muscles in esophagus to start moving. This explains a custom in Hindu practice of taking a wrist full of water and encircling the plate or thali and swallowing it. It is done as a prayer. The second custom is, at the completion the meal, of rinsing your mouth with water and spitting it; this is to clean the mouth. As it is not always possible to do that, one can just swallow it instead of spitting it. It is after all only the food. 
During the meal one can consume some water if necessary. I advise that water should be consumed before and about 45 minutes to an hour after the meal.