# WHAT IS  NORMAL?

When we get any lab tests done of our blood or urine or stool, the report compares our reading to a range which is called normal. 
Have you ever wondered who decided on this normal.
This range is derived from a large sample of population. When you compile readings for any test, it varies from person to person and the curve looks like a bell curve. The area under two standard deviation (2sigma) covers about 95% of the total sample. This is what is meant by normal. To give an example if your hemoglobin falls in the range of 14-17 g/dL. you fit within the 95% of the population. If your reading is above 17 or below 14, all that means is that your hemoglobin falls outside the range in the top or bottom 2.5% of the people. It is often misconstrued to be sign of a problem which may or may not be the case. 
The doctor and you must try and understand why your reading is outside the normal range. 
For some of the blood chemistry the cutoff point is set by a body of Health care providers (doctors, hospitals, test labs etc.), Pharma industry representatives and the governmental agencies like FDA. For example criteria for total cholesterol, vitamin D, fasting glucose, blood pressure are established by different committees. There are divergent vested interests in keeping these cutoff points low (or high), as it may increase the number of patients which benefits doctors and Pharma industry. 
As the modern medicine has emerged from the western countries like England and America, the large samples were taken from local population to establish these criteria for normals and they reflect the diet, lifestyle and health of those people.
The Indian medical system has followed the guidelines set by these countries without paying enough attention to genetic differences and eating habits. Considering that Americans are predominantly meat eaters and Indians are vegetarians, it creates some discrepancies. For example hemoglobin is one factor where Indian people often fall short of the established normal range. It really doesn’t mean they are sick and in need of medication or supplements. 
Another example is that of potassium, for which normal range is 3.6 to 5.2 millimoles per liter (mmol/L). Now a typical American does not consume much of green leafy vegetables which are very rich in potassium. Once you start PBWF/IF/10K program you start getting lot of healthy potassium in your diet and its level in blood rises. As a result blood tests often show the potassium levels exceeding the upper range. This doesn’t mean that you have a health problem. All it means is that you are healthier than 95% of Americans. 
What is increasingly happening in the medical field is that a perfectly healthy person with some bad eating habits, on his 45th or 50th birthday goes for a checkup, and the doctor runs various tests, then he points out discrepancies and suggests some medication and supplements or orders further tests. You take those medications and start getting concerned, the Nocebo  affect comes into play and you start imagining some symptoms. In addition the medication is not without side effects or Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs). Within 6 months you become slightly unwell and visit doctor again. He prescribes other medications to counter the side effects and ADRs and your Nocebo symptoms. This vicious circle continues and you keep getting more and more entangled. Before you realize, you are sixty year old taking five medications. This is exactly what happened to me. 
The doctors today are not taught nutrition, as a result they do not guide you on dietary issues. When and if cornered by patients they share what they may have acquired from mass media, which as we all know, is heavily influenced by the food and drug industry lobbyists. 
Please listen to Padam Bhushan Dr. B.M.Hegde speak on the subject. 👇