# WHY IS OIL BAD?

A persistent question, that keeps popping up, is why oil is bad. Specially when I say that fats in natural plant based whole foods are not bad. In my post “Fat: Yes but No Oils”, I covered it only partially. I also realized that most videos on the subject do not make it very simple to understand. Today I will attempt to explain “WHY” part of this puzzle in more detail. 

Let me preface it by first repeating what I had mentioned in my very first post. We humans evolved over millions of years consuming what grew around us naturally. As a result our body evolved to digest that food well and absorb it. When we process and refine this natural food it’s composition changes and the body needs to adjust and compensate for it. The manners  in which it compensates, lead to other affects which become cause of chronic illnesses. Here are the 10 leading reasons why oil is unhealthy:

1. Consumption of oil (where fiber, in which it was embedded, has already been removed) increases triglycerides levels quickly in the blood and makes it more viscous. This requires heart to pump harder and increases blood pressure. Higher BP has many negative effects on the body as we have discussed separately. This higher BP is not the same thing as the one caused by atherosclerosis which was discussed in the post on Hypertension (refer post 7.3) This higher BP is only for a few hours while your body is trying to get rid of the triglycerides by putting them into your fat cells. But during those few  hrs the high BP is doing its job of harming your kidneys and other harms to capillaries throughout the body like the brain, lungs etc. If you were to just have one oily meal and be done with it, not much harm is done. But if you are having three oily meals a day and snacks in between, and day after day, this harm becomes chronic. 
2. Most cooking oils have disproportionately high amounts of omega-6 compared to to omega-3. Omega-6 is inflammatory (omega-3 is anti inflammatory) and bad for cardio vascular system and leads to CVD. This is what we call atherosclerosis. (refer post 7.1)
3. Oil is bad for blood vessel’s endothelial function. It interferes with the endothelial cell’s (which make the internal lining of the blood vessels) ability to release nitric oxide. 
4. Increases LDLcholesterol level. Your body makes as much cholesterol as it needs. If you are inflaming it more (as in 2 above), it needs to make more; because cholesterol is used to heal the inflammation. Thus a higher level in blood. 
5. Increases insulin resistance by causing intramayocellular lipids, which are deposit of tiny fat cells in muscles. This makes it difficult for insulin to do its job of depositing glucose into muscle cells. As a result more insulin is released by the pancreas to do the same job. This increases the level of insulin in the blood. This is called insulin resistance. This is the precursor to diabetes, also known as pre-pre-diabetes. (Please refer to my post 8.2 Type-2 Diabetes)
6. Excess of omega-6 fats changes cellular function. Fat becomes more reactive to oxygen, causing oxidative stress. (Please refer to my post 2.28 Antioxidants: Herbs & Spices)
7. Though in US, FDA has banned all hydrogenated trans fats (also known as vegetable shortening or Dalda) effective June 2018, it may still be sold in other countries including India. Presence of Trans fats in some oils is extremely harmful. (Refer to my post 3.4 GRAS and Crisco)
8. Saturated fats in oils directly clog arteries and can cause stroke and heart attack in people who are already suffering from Atherosclerosis. 
9. Something about oil damages the epithelial cell (which make the lining of our G-I track wall), which leaves it vulnerable. (Refer to my post 10.10 Leaky Gut Syndrome)

As you can see above, oil increases risk factors for many different diseases besides cardio vascular diseases for which it is widely acknowledged, including diabetes, cancer, stroke, asthma and arthritis.